---
title: "Prospects for Obital Data Centers"
date: 2024-05-24
---
## Executive summary:
How much does cost of access to LEO have to diminish before data centers in orbit make sense? Roughly to a third. If the price of a Falcon 9 was $26 million instead of $67 million, it would make sense. This could move significantly closer if reductions in the weight of data center racks and cooling systems were undertaken.

All other things equal, big data needs to be near its compute. And in orbit, data is growing. Earth observation satellites are moving to high resolution synthetic aperture radar and multi spectral imaging. Space telescopes are in an exciting phase of discovery, and generating a several degrees of magnitude more data. Constellations share of data is growing. Satellite constellations mesh comms are moving to free space laser communications which gives a tremendous bandwidth boost, but because the free space optical cannot tolerate clouds, the earth based radio gateways are a significant bottle neck. I have been told that 60% of Planet Labs revenue goes to third party radio base ground stations. I am a small Planet Labs stock holder and if this is true, I can understand that Planet Labs stock price is struggling. National security workloads can be very time sensitive and for time sensitive applications the need for orbital processing is even more critical. For military and security uses especially, the advantages could be game-changing.

## Power costs
A second compute bottle neck has recently gotten a lot of attention, this time for AI industry.  Mark Zuckenberg described power resources as an important limit for AI datacenters. Various AI analysts suggest that finding a data center with sufficient power is more difficult than sourcing the hard to find Nvidia GPU. Zuckenberg also mentioned that the regulatory environment makes it likely that there might a a 5 year lead time for a new power plant in the 100's of megawatts. And he emphasized the need for data centers with gigawatt power. The long lead times for high capacity terrestrial power plants means alternative power sources are needed for these gigawatt demands. Solar power in orbit is cheap, continuous and without regulation.

By the back of my envelope- nuclear power has too much uncertainty due to regulation costs of decommissioning, and politics. If people resist nuclear power in their backyards, they will doubly resist nuclear power largely for AI, in their backyards. For developers questions abound about cost effectiveness, lead times and uncertainty of future regulation of decommissioning.

Solar farms are well documented. A 150 megawatt solar farm which would require 150 acres and with a life span of 25 years can be built for $221 million, annualized at $8.8 million/year.

A solar panel in orbit receives 1.4 megawatts per square meter. The best space grade solar panels can harvest 33.3% of that. [Rocket Lab IMM-β for instance] At a beta angle of 90 degrees, the orbit allows sunlight 100% of the orbit. There is no night time.  So 150 megawatts can be provided by a panel of 10 by 30 meters, Instead of 150 acres. The solar cells are remarkably light at 49mg/cm2, so for the cells themselves, the weight would be 300 kg. If the infrastructure and structure is required to support them is roughly 4 times the weight of the cells themselves then the power infrastructure would weigh 4 * 300 kg or in other words $3.2M in lift expense to LEO by Falcon 9. The life time would be 5 years so annualized at $640K/year for the cost of launch.  So the cost of power, to the closest million, is close to the cost of the panels themselves.

The power density of the sun in orbit, sun @ 24 hours/day, and the light weight and efficiency of space grade solar cells makes this option very attractive.

Free Laser Communications

Quantum key distribution, done by optical coms, cannot be done at distance by optical fiber as the internal reflections make it difficult to distinguish the resulting quantum state (as I understand it). Line of sight free laser coms between satellites are perfect from a distribution and security point of view. This makes it relatively easy to link smaller orbital data centers together in groups for larger complexes, that may be beyond current lift capacity. 


## Data Center costs:
A data center on earth in rule of thumb terms costs $7 million to $12 million per megawatt of commissioned IT load. So 150 megawatt IT load would be about $1,800 million. If we annualized 50% at 25 years and 50% at 3 years (servers, switches) then we get a rough number of $330 million/year.

How much datacenter could you fit in one Falcon 9 LEO launch at $67 million? 
One could load 16 racks of the latest from NVIDIA - 2 x 8x rack SuperPOD for Nvidia DGX GB200 NVL72 giving you 23 exaflops of FP4 computing. The power consumption would be 2 megawatts for the 576 CPU, 1152 GPU, with 480TB of memory. According to Nvidia, two of these racks can support a 54-trillion parameter model. (GPT-4 is said to be a 1.7-trillion parameter model.) Add 2 million for the satellite, ground stations ...

The same 2 megawatts of IT load on earth would cost far less at $24 million plus $1 million/megawatt for a solar farm so to the closest million ->  $26 million. Roughly a third of current orbital costs. 

## Conclusion: 
Continued reduction in space launch costs, coupled with advances in lightweight power and thermal management solutions, will be the key factors to watch in making orbital data centers a reality.  This use case could indeed become a major driver for the next leap in space technology capabilities. 
